# CRUD

1. In your own words, describe what each group of status code represents:

- 100’s = "informational status codes"; request was received and server is trying to complete the request

- 200’s = "success codes"; request accepted but might not be fully processed

- 300’s = "redirection codes"; resource at location [a] is longer available

- 400’s = "client error codes"; invalid request

- 500’s = "server error codes"; problems with the server


2. What is a status code `202`?

`Code 202: Accepted`

3. What is a status code `308`?

`Code 308: Permanent Redirect`

4. What code would you use if an update didn’t return data to a client?

`Code 204: No content`

5. What code would you use if a resource used to exist but no longer does?

`Code 404: requested resource not found`

6. What is the ‘Forbidden’ status code?

`Code 403: Forbidden`

___

1. Why do we need to pull our MongoDB database string out of our server and put it into our .env?

It should be put within the .env so it is not pushed to a public repo and someone with access would be able to access our URI key.

2. What is middleware?

Software that lies between the operating system and running applications. Helps communication and data management

3. What does `app.use(express.json())` do?

It enables our server to understand json (especially when using thunderclient). 

4. What does the `/:id` mean in a route?

It specifies the request route (ex. path="/about"). 

5. What is the difference between `PUT` and `PATCH`?

`PUT` uses the URI to send modified version of requested data that replaces the original whereas `PATCH` gives instrucitons to modify resource. 

6. How do you make a default value in a schema?

```javascript
category: {
  type: String,
  default: ''
}
```

7. What does a `500` error status code mean?

`Code 500: Internal Server Error`

8. What is the difference between a status `200` and a status `201`?

`200` means request received and is being processed whereas `201` means it was successful and a resource was created as a result. 
