# Class 03 Readings: FileIO & Exceptions  

## Read and Write Files in Python  

___
[Access Link Here](https://realpython.com/read-write-files-python/)

A file is a "set of bytes used to store data". It can anything from text to programs and is organzied in a specifc way.  

- *Header*: metadata (name, size, type, etc)
- *Data*: contents 
- *End of file(EOF)*: special character at end of file to signfiy its done

Path as follows:
1. Folder path 
2. File name
3. Extension (end of file path pre-pended with period(.), indicates type)

To work with a file, obviously you have to open it properly. 

```python 
file = open('example_filename.txt')
```
Then to close it...
```python
file = open('example_filename.txt')

try: 
    # file processing code here
finally: 
    file.close()
```

File objects:
- text files 
- buffered binary files 
- raw binary files

The `__file__` attribute is similar to the `__name__` and it's "the pathname of the file which the module was loaded, if it was loaded from a file."


## Exceptions in Python  

___
[Access Link Here](https://realpython.com/python-exceptions/)

Essentially errors in syntactically correct code. When the code runs into an exception error, it will usually indicate which type. 

The keyname **'raise'** forces an exception in which you can customize your own error message.  

The keyname **'assert'** tests if a condition is true before it runs into a possible error.  

The keyname/block **'try and except'** is very similar to a 'try and catch' in JS, in which if the code runs into an exception, it will run a separate block of code.  

The keyname/block **'try, except, and else'** is the same as above except that when the code does NOT run into an exception, it will run code under the 'else' block.  

The keyname/block **'try, except, else, and finally'** is the same as above except that the code within the 'finally' block will always run no matter what.  

## More Resources: 

___

- [Read and Write Files in Python](https://realpython.com/courses/reading-and-writing-files-python/)
- [Reading and Writing Files in Python Quiz](https://realpython.com/quizzes/read-write-files-python/)