# Class 05 Readings: Linked Lists  

## Big O: Analysis of Algorithm Efficiency  

___  

**What is Big O Notation?**  

[Access Link Here](https://codefellows.github.io/common_curriculum/data_structures_and_algorithms/Code_401/class-05/resources/big_oh.html)

Big O notation "is used to describe the efficiency of an algorithm or function"

- **Running Time:** time it takes a function to complete  
- **Memory Space:** memory a function takes to store data and instructions  

Big O looks at "worst case scenario" in terms of the efficiency of an algorithm through these 4 key areas:

1. ### Input Size

The size of parameter values read by the algorithm (letter `n` used as reference). Larger input size = increase in time and space.

2. ### Units of Measurement

Time measured via milliseconds, operations, and "Basic Operations"

Space measured via code for the algorithm (# of bytes), input data space, output data space, and working space. 

3. ### Orders of Growth

Input size `n` describes overall efficiency and units required. Order of Growth refers to increase to Time and Space.

- *Constant Complexity:* algorithm will always use same time or space no matter the inputs  
- *Logarithmic Complexity:* decrease in rate of complexity growth - greater value of n  
- *Linear Complexity:* size of inputs `n` will directly determine amount of space and length of time  
- *Linearithmic Complexity:* describes growth rate of `n` by `lgn`
- *Quadratic Complexity:* growth of `n` multiplied by `n`  
- *Cubic Complexity:* similar to quadratic but at a higher degree  
- *Exponential Complexity:* very rapidly growing, whatever `n` it performs same number of iterative recursive loops  
- *Factorial Complexity:* space and time grow rapidly relative to input size  


4. ### Best, Worst, and Average Case  

- *Worst Case:* efficiency for worst possible input size of `n`  
    -Big O(oh) represents upper bounds of Time and Space
- *Best Case:* efficiency for best possible input size of `n`  
    - Big Omega represents lower bounds of Time and Space
- *Average Case:* efficiency for 'typical'/'random' input size of `n`  
    - Big Theta represents tight bound of Time and Space

___

## Linked Lists

[Access Link Here](https://codefellows.github.io/common_curriculum/data_structures_and_algorithms/Code_401/class-05/resources/singly_linked_list.html)

"A sequence of `nodes` that are connected/linked to each other." In a Linked List, each node references the next.  

- **Node:** individual items/links within a linked list. Contains data for each link
- **Next:** a property of a node. Contains reference to next node  
- **Head:** reference of type node to first node in linked list
- **Current:** reference of type node to the node that is currently looked at. Create a new Current variable at the Head Time each time 
- **Singly:** number of references the node has. For Singly, there's only one reference which points to the Next node in a linked list  
- **Doubly:** two (double) references within the node. Doubly means reference to both Next and Previous  