# Class 35 Readings: Graphs

## Graphs

___
[Access Link Here](https://codefellows.github.io/common_curriculum/data_structures_and_algorithms/Code_401/class-35/resources/graphs.html)

**Graphs** are a non-linear data structure and a collection of `vertices` (***nodes***) potentially connected by line segments named `edges`

- `Vertex`: aka “**node**”, is a data object that can have zero or more adjacent vertices
- `Edge`: connection between two nodes
- `Neighbor`:adjacent nodes, i.e., are connected via an edge
- `Degree`: number of edges connected to that vertex.

### Directed vs Undirected  

#### Undirected Graph

> A graph where each edge is undirected or bi-directional; graph does not move in any direction

#### Directed Graphs (Digraph)  

> A graph where every edge is directed
>
> Unlike an undirected graph, a Digraph has direction. Each node is directed at another node with a specific requirement of what node should be referenced next.

### Complete vs Connected vs Disconnected  

The three different types of graphs are completed, connected, and disconnected.

- `Complete Graphs`
    - A complete graph is when all nodes are connected to all other nodes.

- `Connected`
    - A connected graph is graph that has all of vertices/nodes have at least one edge.

- `Disconnected`
    - A disconnected graph is a graph where some vertices may not have edges.

### Acyclic vs Cyclic

- `Acyclic Graph`
    - An acyclic graph is a directed graph without cycles. 
    - A cycle is when a node can be traversed through and potentially end up back at itself.

> **Note: directed acyclic graph = **DAG***

- `Cyclic Graphs`
    - A Cyclic graph is a graph that has cycles.
    - A cycle is defined as a path of a positive length that starts and ends at the same vertex.

### Graph Representation  

1. `Adjacency Matrix`
2. `Adjacency List`


- `Adjacency Matrix`
    - An Adjacency matrix is represented through a 2-dimensional array. If there are n vertices, then we are looking at an n x n Boolean matrix

- `Adjacency List`
    - An adjacency list is a collection of linked lists or array that lists all of the other vertices that are connected

### Weighted Graphs  

A weighted graph is a graph with numbers assigned to its edges. These numbers are called weights.  

- `Weighted Matrix` and `Weighted List`

### Traversals  

`Breadth First`:
1. **Enqueue** the declared start node into the Queue
2. Create a loop that will run while the node still has nodes present
3. **Dequeue** the first node from the queue
4. If the **dequeue**'d node has unvisited child nodes, add the unvisited children to a `visited` set and insert them into the queue

```python

ALGORITHM BreadthFirst(vertex)
    DECLARE nodes <-- new List()
    DECLARE breadth <-- new Queue()
    DECLARE visited <-- new Set()

    breadth.Enqueue(vertex)
    visited.Add(vertex)

    while (breadth is not empty)
        DECLARE front <-- breadth.Dequeue()
        nodes.Add(front)

        for each child in front.Children
            if(child is not visited)
                visited.Add(child)
                breadth.Enqueue(child)

    return nodes;

```

`Depth First`:

1. **Push** the root node into the Stack and mark as visited
2. Start a while loop that runs as long as the stack is not empty
3. **Pop** the top node off of the stack and check its neighbors
4. If a neighbor hasn’t been visited, push it onto the stack and mark as visited
5. Repeat until the stack is empty
