# Class 30 Reading: Hash Tables


## Intro to Hash Tables

___
[Access Link Here](https://codefellows.github.io/common_curriculum/data_structures_and_algorithms/Code_401/class-30/resources/Hashtables.html)

### What is a Hashtable?

- **Hash** is the result of some algorithm taking an incoming string and converting it into a value that could be user for either security or other purposes.  
    - In the case of a ***hashtable***, it is used to determine index of an array/list

- **Buckets** is what is contained in each index of the array/list of the hashtable. Each index is a *bucket*. An index could potentially contain multiple key/value pairs if a collision occurs.  

- **Collisions** is what happens when more than one key gets hashed to the same location of the hashtable

Hashtables are useful for:

- holding unique values
- Dictionary
- Library

A hash code turns a key into an integer.  

> **Hash codes are deterministic; their output is determined only by their input*

#### To create a Hash:

1. Add or multiply all the ASCII values together  
2. Multiply it by a prime number such as 599
3. Use modulo to get the remainder of the result, when divided by the total size of the array/list
4. Insert into the array/list at that index

Example:

```python

Key = "Cat"
Value = "Josie"

67 + 97 + 116 = 280

280 * 599 = 69648

69648 % 1024 = 16

Key gets placed in index of 16. 

```

#### Hash maps: Storing Values

- accept a key
- calculate the hash of the key
- use modulus to convert the hash into an array index
- store the key **with** the value by appending both to the end of a linked list

#### Hash maps: Reading Values

- accept a key
- calculate the hash of the key
- use modulus to convert the hash into an array index
- use the array index to access the short LinkedList representing a bucket
- search through the bucket looking for a node with a key/value pair that matches the key you were given

> **The more buckets a hash map has, the less liklihood of collsions. However, it requires more space*

#### Internal Methods

- `Add()`
- `Find()`
- `Contains()`
- `GetHash()`


## What is a Hash Table?

___
[Access Link Here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MfhjkfocRR0)

Hash tables contain two main components: `Key` and `Value`. Hashtable will have an array structure at the base and are usually quite large. 

The `Key` will return an index which determines which it will go into the table. **That key will always return the same index.**

One way to avoid collisions, which is when two keys have the same index, is to extend the length of one of the elements. This is called `Chaining`. 

Hashtables are useful because they can hold large amounts of data. In the case in where you need to find a piece of data, you can enter the key into hashtables and it will search for the data within that index *(doesn't need to search through all the indexes)*.

## Basics of Hash Tables

___
[Access Link Here](https://www.hackerearth.com/practice/data-structures/hash-tables/basics-of-hash-tables/tutorial/)

Can be compared to how universities assign students a unique ID number; no student should have the same number.  

> **Do to hashtable's unique time efficiency, time is O(1)*

Implementing hash tables:

- Element is converted into integer by using a hash function
- Element is stored in the hash tbale where it can be quickly retrieved using hashed key

**Hash Functions** are used to "map a data set of an arbitrary size to a data set of a fixed size (`hash table`)." Most effective hash functions:

1. Easy to compute
2. Uniform distribution
3. Less collisions

> **Note: collisions are bound to occur, do not fret if a collision happens within your hash table*

### Collision resolution techniques

1. **Separate Chaining**: "(E)ach element of the hash table is a linked list. To store an element in the hash table you must insert it into a specifc linked list."

>**Also known as `open hashing`*

2. **Linear Probing**: "(A)ll entry records are stored in the array itself. When a new entry has to be inserted, the hash index of the hashed value is computed and then the array is examined. If the slot at the hashed index in unoccupied, then the entry record is inserted in slot at the hashed index."

>**AKA `open addressing` or `closed hashing`*

3. **Quadratic Probing**: (similar to `linear probing`)"(W)hen the slot at a hashed index for an entry record is already occupied, you must start treversing until you find an unoccupied slot. The interval between slots is computed by adding the successfive value of an arbitrary polynomial in the original hashed index"

4. **Double Hashing**: (similar to `linear probing`) "(T)he interval between probes is computed by using two hash functions"

___
## More resources on Hash Tables: 

- [Hash Table Wiki](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hash_table)
